When it was time for Elizabeth to have her baby, she gave birth to a son.
Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.
On the eighth day, they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to name him after his father, Zachariah.
But his mother spoke up and said, no, he used to be called John.
They said to her, there is no one among your relatives who has that name.
Then they made signs to his father to find out what he would like to name the child.
He asked for a riding tablet and to everyone's astonishment.
He wrote his name is John.
Immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue set free and he began to speak praising God.
All the neighbors were filled with all and throughout the hill country of Judea.
People were talking about all these things.
Everyone who heard this wondered about it asking, what then is this child going to be?
for the Lord's hand was on him.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
Just about a week ago now, I attended parent teacher conferences for Hank and Simon, which at this point in my parenting life, I'm pretty used to.
There's no mystery or anxiety associated with these meetings for me.
I could tell you what the teacher's gonna say before I even walk into the classroom.
Well, he's doing great, generally tracking academically.
He is a bit of a talker, though, isn't he?
Such a social butterfly, which reading between the lines means your son is tracking academically but will never, ever be quiet and still.
So I'm sitting in that classroom in this little desk chair made for a seven-year-old, which feeling like Buddy the Elf, you know?
Side note.
Those of you in public education, how hard would it be to get another adult-sized chair in the room for these conferences that we do several times a year?
It feels like a power play that I'm with a teacher in a rolling desk chair, and unlike my abdomen, it's pressed against laminated wood.
Anyway, as I'm sitting there in that little chair in Hank's fourth grade classroom, I was transported in my imagination back to my own fourth grade classroom.
I had Mrs. Smith.
She's the star chart to track good and bad behavior.
I ended up in the negatives week after week, which meant I spent a huge amount of time and time out.
The universal punishment, which is utilized across cultures and eras celebrated by parents of every persuasion of lenient and strict, the undisputed champion of all consequences is time out.
That's how most of us experience silence and solitude first as an unwanted disciplinary tactic to curb our bad behavior.
There's something universal in us that fears quiet and alone, experiencing those conditions as torment.
And for the most part, we never grow out of that.
You know, the harshest punishment in the US prison system is solitary confinement.
be quiet and alone for an extended period of time a long time out.
That's as bad as it gets, even in adulthood.
Quiet and alone is a combination of conditions that we only meet accidentally, at least at first.
Hang on to that.
Alongside the global church, we're currently living in the season of Advent.
Our theme this year is First Light, which refers to that very first
faint illumination in the night's darkness that welcomes each new day.
First slide, that's a good way for us to understand a few of Jesus' most distant relatives, a family before Mary and Joseph, who make away for the dawning of the light of the world himself, Zechariah, Elizabeth, and John.
So we'll meet those characters and the cadence Luke introduces them to us.
Up first,
is Zechariah.
So look back from the earbibles.
We're going to trace back from where we read a moment ago up to the top of the chapter.
I want to begin reading from verse 5.
In the time of King Herod, sorry, in the time of Herod, King of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah who belonged to the priestly tribe of Abishah.
His wife Elizabeth was also a descendant of Aaron.
So hang on a second.
When Luke sets out to tell the story of stories, the most far-reaching and important news that will ever be announced, he does not begin with angels Mary or Joseph, with shepherds Magi or Jesus.
He opens with a few characters who won't be in any nativity scene, a priest named Zechariah and his wife Elizabeth.
Zechariah were told as a descendant of Levi and has become a priest himself, verse seven.
Both of them were righteous in the sight of God, observing all the Lord's commands and decrees blamelessly.
Now that's a cue from Luke that would be obvious to his ancient readers, but is probably lost on most of us.
The Jewish priesthood was pretty thoroughly corrupt in the first century, splintering into sex strongly divided against each other in response to their cultural moment.
Some of the priests who were known as the Sadducees were famous
for compromising the way of God to play ball with secular culture, politics, and economics.
Luke is distinguishing Zechariah from that tribe of priests.
He's a priest, yes, but believe it or not, he's a good, honorable, loving, and devout priest.
It would be like me saying, he's an American politician, yes, but, keep reading.
But they were childless because Elizabeth was not able to conceive, and they were both very old.
So Zechariah and Elizabeth were righteous, blameless, and barren.
One of these things is not like the other.
First century Jewish spirituality held that physical illness often had a spiritual cause, particularly chronic illness or disability, something like barrenness or infertility.
was viewed as a divine judgment for some type of egregious wrong.
That's why a number of different places in the biblical story, including later in Luke chapter one, infertility is described as a source of personal shame and public disgrace.
So check this out.
Luke is setting up a puzzle right at the beginning of his gospel for you and I to ponder.
If Zechariah and Elizabeth are righteous and blameless,
Why is God withholding blessing from them?
One of the best friends I've ever had in my life, and one of those women who seem tailor-made to be a mom, spent her early adult life mothering all of her friends in a really good way, planned to have four kids minimum.
When she and her husband decided that they were ready, they just couldn't get pregnant, went from
doctor to doctor to doctor with no diagnosis, round after round of IVF with no progress, prayed and prayed and the years just passed and passed.
What kind of God designs a woman's body with the capacity to carry life, then withholds life?
What kind of God would grant child after child to thousands of oops stories and then ignores the
Ease, prayers of one of his daughters.
Have you ever asked questions like those?
That's the puzzle.
That's the puzzle Luke is inviting you and I to ponder.
Read on.
Once when Zachariah's division was on duty and he was serving as priest before God, he was chosen by lot according to the custom of the priesthood to go into the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
So the Jewish priesthood was a really well-run organization.
At the time of Jesus' birth, there were an estimated 20,000-plus active priests in service.
They were grouped into 24 divisions rotating weekly to serve the temple.
Each division served temple duty twice a year for week-long shifts.
The priests would then sleep at the temple when they were on duty, a lot like
Firefighters sleep at the firehouse when they're on duty in modern culture.
Luke is telling us here that when the time came for the sect of Abi Jia to serve, Zechariah drew the straw with the prestigious role of burning incense in the room before the Holy of Holies.
So check this out.
This is a simplified blueprint of what should be in your imagination when you think about the Jewish temple.
The holy of holies is the innermost room where God lived and not metaphorically either.
There's an entire Old Testament to explain the way that God took up residence among his people in his temple.
Zechariah had probably waited his entire life to get this close to God and serve God's people, this profoundly.
For seven days, he had drawn the straw
to crash in a cot next to the Creator and offer up the most sacred of prayers for all of God's people.
This was undoubtedly an honor professionally.
And equally, it had to be painful personally.
The tragic irony is, Zechariah's own prayers haven't been answered.
And now he is the one selected to offer prayers on behalf of a nation's worth of people.
He's nearing retirement age, and he's finally selected for the most honorable of all priestly roles, but to come near to God is also to face how deeply this God has disappointed me.
So Zachariah is invited to bring his grief, disappointment, and angst about divine justice.
right into the presence of God.
And bringing my pain into God's presence involves the intensification of that pain for the risk of the healing of it.
Back to the story.
than an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.
When Zechariah saw him, he was startled and gripped with fear, but the angel said to him, do not be afraid, Zechariah, your prayer has been heard.
Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to call him John.
Scan down to verse 18.
Zechariah asked the angel, how can I be sure of this?
I'm an old man, and my wife is well along in years.
So Zechariah is asking for confirmation, which is understandable.
I mean, who hasn't had a profound spiritual experience and then later wondered if it was really God I was hearing or if I was just hearing what I wanted to hear.
So look, on one hand, this request for confirmation is entirely reasonable.
At the same time though, Zechariah is asking for confirmation from an angel.
I love the angel's response.
Verse 19, the angel said to him,
I am Gabriel.
I stand in the presence of God and have been sent to speak to you to tell you this good news.
It's kind of like, uh, Zach, I'm gleaming white and levitating nine inches off the ground.
How much more clear could God be making this for you?
There's so much humanity in this story because we've all been Zechariah.
Some of us are today.
We identify with our disappointment at such a depth that it becomes the lens through which we see and experience everything else, even God.
God is faithful to the whole world.
Absolutely.
He will redeem all things, gather all nations, right all wrong.
I believe that, but don't ask me to believe that God will heal my body.
That God will restore my shattered marriage.
The God will satisfy my longing for a companion.
The God will bring back my long gone son or daughter.
That is too personal.
Don't ask me to believe that after all this waiting, God's going to grant Elizabeth and I a baby.
I'm here to do a job to pray for the people outside.
Don't make this that personal.
I can't take that.
The depth at which some of us
identify with our own disappointment, causes us to define all that we see and experience through a set of well-calculated, lowered expectations for God and the way he deals with us.
Verse 20, and now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their appointed time.
Quiet and alone are consequences, right?
A punishment.
That's how we experience them first when they're enforced upon us by an outside authority like this.
It's a punishment.
And that's an experience we never grow out of.
You'll be quiet and alone in some very real sense until this promise named John is alive in flesh and blood and held in your own arms.
So here's my question.
Is God putting Zechariah in a time out?
Is silence a gift?
Or is it a punishment?
Advent is not Christmas.
It's a time of slowing, quieting, and stealing ourselves for the sake of Christmas.
Since the inception of the early church, Advent has been observed as a time to grieve.
Nature's darkest days of the year repurposed as a time to look into the darkest corners of my own life, a time to retreat intentionally into the quiet face, my disappointment, my pain, my angst, my anger, and my grief.
Today, Advent Quiet has been replaced by Christmas noise.
Advent's solitude exchanged for Christmas busyness.
We take the very time of the year reserved for quietly grieving, and we replace it with busyness, talking, entertainment, and endless celebration.
Maybe we're just that happy with that much more to celebrate than our ancient spiritual ancestors had.
I doubt that, though.
More likely we're disappointed, grief-stricken, and we don't know how to face it.
So we busy ourselves.
We push away our pain and chatter treats, cocktails, and sentiments.
One of the most fascinating books I read in the last year was called Wintering by Katherine May, and it was an exploration about how modern Western human beings are the first species in all of recorded history, not to utilize the summer for some type of preparation for the inevitable arrival of the winter.
Every animal species we know of
does some sort of preparation for the impending winter every summer, some sort of storing away to survive when everything around them is dark, cold, and dead.
And actually every tribe or people group or culture that you trace throughout history has done the same.
They've used summer to prepare for the winter.
Modern people though, I mean, we live in a world of grocery stores and fluorescent lights and central heating and Amazon Prime and DoorDash.
So we don't need to prepare in the summer to survive the winter.
And I'm very grateful for that true story.
Just a couple of weeks ago, I wanted Poke, Kirsten wanted Vietnamese, we couldn't decide which one.
So we both ordered DoorDash.
And the drivers arrived in my driveway at the same moment.
And they both walked up to the door looking really confused.
And then when we both came to the door, they just got judgy.
I could see it in their eyes immediately.
But I was delighted.
I'm very grateful to live at the moment in history that I'm living in.
But Catherine May's observation carries profound implications for our inner lives as well.
And counsel throughout church history has been that consolation
Our spiritual summers, when God seems close and available and clear, consolation is properly stewarded when we store up the treasures of those seasons.
Remember and savor the promises, the blessings, because we know that we're going to need them in the inevitable arrival of desolation.
Those spiritual winters, when God seems far and absent and confusing.
If we do not prepare for winter, then we do not deal with barrenness very well.
With interruption, intrusion, and pain, with disappointment, disillusion, and disorder, with loss, betrayal, loneliness, and the God who didn't stop any of it and refuses to exploit himself.
Advent is preparation for winter.
It is facing and grieving our disappointments so that they don't define us.
The church invites our people to zig while the culture is zagging, to grow quiet amid all the noise to choose solitude and stillness in a season of busyness and chatter.
The World Health Organization named noise pollution as the second worst environmental toxin after air pollution, worse than oil or gas.
A recent study in the European Union found that noise pollution was responsible for a million daylies a year in Europe alone.
That's disabled disability adjusted life years, meaning you live to 70 when you should have lived to 73 because you happen to be on a noisy block or your apartments above a busy cafe.
One study found that prescriptions for anxiety medication rise 28% for every 10 decibel increase in neighborhood noise.
In an article first published in a scientific journal titled, This Is Your Brain on Silence, the journalist David Gross says, the body reacts immediately and powerfully to loud noise, even in the middle of deep sleep.
Neurophysiological research suggests that noise is first activate the amygdala, clusters of neurons located in the temporal lobes of the brain, associated with memory formation and emotion.
The activation prompts an immediate release of stress hormones like cortisol.
People who live in consistently loud environments often experience chronically elevated levels of stress hormones.
The psychological development of human beings was formed in a much, much quieter world.
Every time I go camping or backpacking, the first thing I notice is that it's so quiet out here.
And that was just normal.
for the vast majority of the world for most of human history.
In nature, pretty much everything that's loud is a threat.
a bear or a cougar, a thundercloud or an earthquake.
So when you're living in Portland, you might think, oh, that's just the hum of the HVAC or the beep of another delivery truck or the rumble of the max, but your body is still interpreting noise over a certain decibel level as a threat, activating and releasing stress hormones into your central nervous system all the time.
Our cities are so noisy, but so is our culture.
Right, we could talk about the noise of Portland, or the noise of Christmas, or we could just talk about the noise of the front page of the New York Times, the latest episode of the Huberman podcast, and the incessant political war that we're all living through.
Right, there's external noise, but you're also dealing with all the internal noise of the global, national, local news headlines, the noise of political and ideological banter that's on your screen and around your table and in your own head.
And the next health thing you're worried about when you thought you were just counting macros and counting steps, but now you've learned you've been ingesting microplastics this whole time and you need to drink electrolyte powder every day too.
Noise pollution is all around us.
But has there ever been a time and place in world history with more noise pollution than 21st century America in December?
Advent is a four-week window set aside in the year to intentionally follow and secularize footsteps to draw.
nearer to God's presence, bringing our grief, our pain, our disappointments into God's presence.
Has the church ever needed Advent's invitation to silence and solitude more than right now?
I wonder if the greatest threat to your and my spiritual formation as we swim in a world of this much noise pollution isn't so much hedonism as it is just distraction.
Because the truth is, we will not grow much spiritually if we are busy.
We won't grow much spiritually if we're in a hurry.
We will find it very hard to hear God's voice if our minds are noisy and cluttered, and we will not receive the gifts God longs to give us if we're constantly distracted.
My friend AJ Sherrill writes,
The primary task of a Christian in Advent is growing one's capacity to perceive the story by slowing down long enough to receive it.
Too much talking, doubting, spending, and stressing crowds out Emmanuel.
God with us.
But there's nothing wrong with Christmas parties and fun plans during the holiday season.
Busyness is not inherently evil.
There's nothing wrong with Christmas music and catching up with friends and get togethers.
But the truth is, busyness and noise are also some of our best subconscious strategies for avoiding the reality of our lives.
When we grow disappointed with life, we often just stay busy in order to numb our pain.
We slow down.
We're left with the chaos of our inner lives that we effortlessly hold at bay, so long as we never stop moving and scheming and planning and doing.
But if you want to see the sunrise, then you first have to look long and hard into the dark.
And that brings us to Elizabeth.
Let's pick back up with Luke in verse 24 of chapter 1.
After this, his wife Elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion.
The Lord has done this for me.
She said, in these days he has shown his favor and taken away my disgrace among the people.
Now this English word, seclusion in Luke's original Greek is paracribo, which interestingly is also the biblical word for solitude.
Elizabeth, hearing God whisper the same promise into her deep place of pain and grief, does not question God like her husband, Zachariah.
She quiets herself, retreats into solitude, and attempts to listen more attentively to God.
A couple weeks ago, I was at a friend's cabin for the weekend.
And on Saturday morning, I made a cup of coffee and I went and I sat on the deck and I began to pray,
Holy Spirit.
And then I heard this, and it startled me.
And I looked up and ducked because I heard something above my head, and it was just a bird flying about 30 feet over me.
Not a particularly large bird, just a bird.
It was the sound of the flapping of its wings.
And I realized that that sort of noise is going on around me
all the time.
I just can't hear it in all the competing noise of the hustle and bustle of my busy life and noisy society.
But here in seclusion in a solitary place, I can hear so clearly what's constant but washed away in the ordinary life I lead.
Cal Newport in his book, Digital Minimalism, defines solitude as a place that is free of inputs.
That's where Elizabeth goes.
She retreats into a place that is free from all other inputs so she can attune her ear to God.
She can hear the God who's constantly speaking to her, but harder to hear in this busyness and noise of her ordinary life.
Eastern Orthodox Bishop Koolistos Ware says, solitude is a state of inner tranquility or mental quietude and concentration.
Not simply silence, but an attitude of listening to God and of openness to God.
Is he ultimately, solitude is not so much about getting away from external conditions like noise and busyness.
It's about the internal condition of yielding myself to God's voice.
It's about yielded contentment
to wherever God might lead me.
It's about freedom from all of our attachments and compulsions, all of that dysregulated clinging that you and I do to convince ourselves that we need this and that in order to be okay when in reality those compulsions are the very things that are imprisoning us.
Quiet solitude opens my ears to hear the whispers of God that I can't hear in noise and busyness.
That's attentiveness.
And when Elizabeth grows quiet and attentive, what does she hear?
We'll just keep reading, verse 26.
In the sixth month of Elizabeth's pregnancy, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, the town and Galilee to a virgin, pledged to be married to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David.
The virgin's name was Mary.
Now, wait a second.
There's a scene change here.
Luke doesn't tell us what Elizabeth heard in her silence.
He doesn't leave us entirely in the dark either though, verse 39.
At that time Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judea where she entered Zechariah's home and greeted Elizabeth.
Now the key phrase in this verse with the one I want to draw your attention to is at that time.
So according to Luke's account, very little if any time has passed between Mary's encounter
with the angel Gabriel and her visit to her cousin Elizabeth.
And you got to remember, we are interacting with the first-century Middle Eastern world here, not the modern Western world.
There is no social media post of the sonogram.
There's not even a sonogram.
There's no text, no phone.
There's not even a sophisticated postal service.
All to say, there is no way for Elizabeth to know that her cousin Mary is pregnant.
but she does know.
Because she calls Mary the mother of my Lord in the lines that followed before Mary has said a word to her.
So here's puzzle number two from Luke.
How does Elizabeth know?
Well, Luke's already told us that.
She's been paying careful attention.
She's been listening closely to the story that God's telling for five months now.
In solitude, Elizabeth found herself in the unfolding story of God's redemption, and she began to see beyond just the surface of things to the way that God is conspiring to renew the whole world.
and the ordinary people and circumstances of her life, even right in the midst of her deepest pain and most long-lasting grief.
In the quiet, God is slowly peeling Elizabeth's eyes open to behold her tiny personal story in light of his massive renewal story.
In the quiet as she listened to God and chewed on his promises, Elizabeth began to wonder, could it really be
that I'm in line with Sarah and Rebecca and Rachel and Hannah.
Could it really be that God values my life as much as theirs who I've admired since birth?
Could it really be that I matter so much to God that he would write me into a cast member role in his redemption?
And when she dares to believe,
that she is as important to God as God is showing her that she is.
All of a sudden, she is able to uncover and call the same thing out of others.
Who am I that the mother of my Lord would come to me?
Do you see when Elizabeth begins to believe in her own identity as God is naming it, she begins to draw the same out of the other people who come to knock on her door?
And finally, John.
In the teaching test we read to begin, when their child or their promised child is born, Zechariah's silence is finally broken.
When it is, he speaks these words of promise over his son, John.
And then John, the child of this promise, when he's introduced to us as an adult at the beginning of Luke chapter three, we meet him this way.
The word of God came to John, son of Zechariah, in the wilderness.
John is the living fulfillment of an even more ancient prophetic promise from Isaiah, a voice of one calling out in the wilderness.
Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.
Now this English word, wilderness, it's the Greek term, eremos, which can be translated as wilderness, solitary place, or secluded place.
The son of a father who was driven into seclusion by divine force, and a mother who chose seclusion by divine consent, lives his entire life in seclusion, in solitude.
And the Lord he's preparing the way for?
The one he's making straight paths for his arrival were introduced to Jesus in his adulthood in the following chapter by Luke this way.
Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, left the Jordan, was led by the Spirit into the, what, friends?
the wilderness.
Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, was driven into solitude, just like Zechariah and Elizabeth and John before him.
You're beginning to see a pattern here about where God can be found, about where we are formed.
Jesus' ministry was born from solitude.
In fact, in a way, every word of Jesus' teaching
was birthed from the labor of solitude.
The silence God offers as a gift, not a punishment.
And this isn't a one-time act either.
Just keep reading in Luke's Gospel.
The very next chapter we read, Jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed.
And that phrase lonely places.
If you were reading it in Luke's original Greek, you'll never guess what it says.
Eremos.
Jesus often withdrew into seclusion.
into solitude, into the wilderness.
Jesus chose Advent's invitation again and again and again, zig, while the world around you is zagging, when the noise gets loud as retreat into the quiet, when the world is busiest, but come still and listen, that's where God has found, that's where we are formed.
The Quaker theologian, a former Stanford chaplain, Elton Shrewblood once said, the more public your life, the more you must learn to hide.
Could he who passed away in 1994 even have imagined how publicly all modern people would live in our age of constant connectivity and image management?
Have you ever noticed the disciples always have to go searching for Jesus?
He's always hiding.
Where was he?
He was here last night.
We can't find him anywhere this morning.
He slipped away to hide.
Increasingly so is his life becomes increasingly public.
And if Jesus needed the practice of silence and solitude, how much more do we?
Yeah, but I've got a toddler and an infant at home right now and you don't understand if Jesus needed the practice of silence and solitude, how much more do we?
Sure, but I work in marketing and retail, and it's December.
It's the holidays.
You don't get it.
You're a pastor.
If Jesus needed the practice of silence and solitude, how much more do we?
Yeah, but I'm a college student.
In its exam season, I know you play video games two hours every night.
If Jesus needed the practice of silence and solitude, how much more do we?
Look, we need silence and solitude because all other spiritual practices teach us a way of growth by addition.
How do you grow spiritually?
You read the Bible, you pray in words, you sing out songs and praise, you lead a Georgetown community and volunteer with the youth group and serve the needy.
You put the right things in and then you get the results you want.
We're experts at growth by addition.
How do I grow in my vocation?
I think I go to the right conference and I get some additional training and I find a great mentor.
What about if I want to grow in my marriage?
You need to find the right counselor and then attend this weekend intensive and read this book.
We are experts at growth by addition, but silence and solitude grow us up by subtraction.
Can I tell you something?
You can even use the Christmas story, and I mean the Jesus Christ, not Santa Claus, like the real ancient, hopeful Christmas story.
You can even use this story as a distraction from your pain.
You and I can rush to celebrate the light of the world without ever staring into the dark and let our eyes adjust to the reality of our own lives that that light breaks.
You can even use the Bible as a way to distract yourself from holding your pain in God's presence.
There are endless varieties of ways that you and I can conspire to avoid peace in reality because we are seeking peace in abstraction.
The only way to know real peace is by subtraction.
It is to allow silence to strip you of every other input to expose every disordered attachment, control mechanism and compulsion, leaving you with nothing but the reality of your bare self in God's loving presence.
Peace cannot be circumstantial because there is no life script that protects us from pain.
You and I never tire of the illusion that there's some set of conditions that we can piece together where we'll be happy, fulfilled, internally still quiet, content, and that peace.
But if peace is synonymous with painlessness, it's a fairy tale that not even the angel Gabriel can walk you into.
Peace cannot be the protection from pain because the older we get, the more vulnerable we become to pain, not less.
The older you get, the more susceptible you become to incoming intrusions and stinging pain, even if your life goes generally according to plan.
If you have three healthy and happy kids, there's a pretty good chance that one of them's gonna grow up to go through at least one season where they blame you for their dysfunction and distance themselves from you.
And you have to bear the day in and day out reality of waiting and hoping that God will reunite the two of you by His grace because your trying isn't working.
If you have a happy marriage, then you will one day live for years missing and grieving
Him or her every day or she, you.
If you grow in leadership in the company, I can guarantee you the day's gonna come when someone that you trust is gonna betray you, hurt you, and stab you in the back.
And if you grow in leadership in the church.
A community member's gonna end up typecasting you falsely, accusing you of putting words in your mouth, betraying your confidence, and shattering you from the inside out one of these days.
And if you are the image of the invisible God, first born over all of creation, victor over sin, suffering, death, and the grave, perfect relationship with God, self, and others, then one of your disciples will betray you and be unable to bear the guilt of seeing them real selves, and they will take their life while you're reclaiming your own,
Even resurrection will be shadowed by one missing member of the band.
True peace is forged when I get slow and quiet enough to face my darkness and allow God's real presence to meet my real pain, his warmth, my winter.
Psychological consensus affirms that growth occurs when we're pushed about 10% beyond our current capacity.
Meaning that if you want to get stronger and you can currently bench press 100 pounds, trying to bench 200 pounds won't make you stronger.
It will probably mean you drop a bar on your neck and collapse your esophagus and have a really embarrassing gym situation best case scenario.
If you want to grow intellectually, you shouldn't join the most prestigious master's program at an Ivy League school.
You should probably just start trying to read a few pages of a novel every day.
You get it.
If you want to find and be formed by God in silence and solitude, you probably shouldn't start by building a yurt on Mount Hood and living all of December in the actual wilderness.
Instead, just take a moment and reflect on this.
What could I do this December?
to make my life 10% slower and quieter.
What God are you inviting me to subtract from my life to make more room for you this Advent season?
What pain
Are you bringing to my mind today God that you're inviting me to look into rather than away from?
To grieve with you at the risk of being healed by you.
When, where and how God are you inviting me to practice quiet?
To choose seclusion like Elizabeth so I can wait on you.
What could I do this December to make my life 10% slower and quieter?
Holy Spirit, would you come?
Light up for each of us.
What might be the first step along the path of peace?
Throughout Advent, as we gather midweek around tables in our Bridgestone communities, we're going to be practicing silence.
And this week, it's going to be all about silencing the mind in pursuit of peace.
But to close this morning, I'm going to land here.
Zachariah's silence, was it a punishment?
Or was it a gift?
Well, I've come to believe that kind of depends on your answer to another much more personal question.
What do I want?
this Advent season.
Because if what I want is to defer, deny, forget, and escape, then I'm better off just letting the cultural current carry me right into noise and busyness.
Silence will be nothing more than a time out for the soul craving those things.
But if what I want is peace, well then silence is a divine gift to you and me.
just like it was to Zechariah who broke his nine month silence with this celebratory flurry that culminated.
The rising sun will come to us from heaven to shine on those living in darkness and in the shadow of death to guide our feet in the path of peace.
There it is again.
Peace.
Peace cannot be circumstantial because there is no life script that protects us from pain.
If peace is synonymous with painlessness, it is a fairy tale, an abstraction, an escape from reality, not a way to live resiliently within it.
And on the final night of his life, the one that Zechariah broke his silence and celebration over Jesus, the one who leads us in the path of peace, he made this promise, peace I leave with you, my peace I give you, I do not give to you as the world gives.
Do not let your hearts be troubled.
and do not be afraid.
What keeps us from the solitude that Scripture so constantly and compellingly invites us into?
Maybe we don't need it because we're just so happy and carefree.
I doubt that.
Maybe we found an inner stillness that we can slip into effortlessly even in a noisy world.
No, that can't be it either because you and I are human.
We got central nervous systems and neural pathways and all we've discovered about psychology tells us that silence does something different to you than sound and stillness something different than movement and aloneness, something different than crowds, full stop.
This is the season of the year where we honor and celebrate the fact that God became human.
He took on our humanity.
He didn't liberate us from our bodies.
He took on one dignifying our bodies, meaning God wants to meet us in our humanity.
central nervous system where you're holding chronic stress, neural pathways where you're holding current anxiety, body where you're holding past trauma.
God wants to meet you right there.
And that means God wants to meet you in silence.
So what is it then?
What is it that keeps us?
sleeping next to our phone and pining for a screen all of the time.
What is it that keeps our earbuds in, our minds distracted, our notifications churning, our thumbs typing so that all of our aloneness gets turned into chatter and all of our quiet gets made so noisy.
It's fear.
Because when you finally put all of that down, what are you left with?
Your pain.
Go into solitude and your pain's gonna be waiting for you there.
Your unanswered prayer is there.
Your divorce is there.
Your infertility is there.
The death of your child is there.
Your secret sin is there.
Your unhealed abuse is there.
Your infidelity is there.
Your family trauma is there.
Your doubt is there.
Your addiction is there.
Your disordered attachments are in there.
And the love of God is right in there with all of the rest of it.
slip away into solitude, hide yourself away like Jesus this Advent season and you will face the pain and grief that you keep buried, shoveling busyness and noise and distraction over all of it until you see finally what you've tried not to face and you will meet the unconditional love of God.
right in the midst of your unique mess and your unique pain saying, I love you.
I love you.
My peace I give you.
My peace I leave with you.
I don't give like the world gives.
Do not let your heart be troubled and do not be afraid.
Let's then respond together.
Thanks for joining the Bridgestown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgestown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgestown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at bridgestown.church.gov.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.